## Acknowladgment

<div style="text-align: justify">

I still cherish the memory of my Baba (grandfather) telling me the story of Dhurv Tara (the pole star), Akashganga (Milkyway), Surya (the Sun) and many more. Those stories had a very significant impact on me, and because of that, as a very young child, I started wondering about the night sky, much before I learned the words “Astronomy” or “Astrophysics”. Today, I am delighted to say that my Baba was the one who sowed the seed in my mind, and today, that seed is flourishing as my interest in the subject. I am also thankful to all my teachers who taught me since childhood, kept enlightening my path, and believed in me. I would also like to pass my gratitude to the former and current directors of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics for providing me with the excellent opportunity to pursue my career in Astronomy and Astrophysics. Many thanks to all the faculty members of IIA, RRI and IISc who taught me during the course–work which served as the foundation for rest of my research.


I am sure I will be short of words when I thank my mentor Dipu Da (Prof Dipankar Banerjee) because he has always been more than a thesis supervisor. I will thank him by saying that “the Sun will never be just a mere star for me” because of the insight he has given me to look at the Sun. I am beyond grateful to Bidya Da (Dr Bidya Binay Karak) for his constant guidance and support, like an elder brother, during this period. It has been such a blessing for me to get a chance to work with Arnab Da (Prof Arnab Rai Choudhuri), and I would like to pass my deepest gratitude to him for the opportunity. I would also like to thank Prof Sami Solanki and Prof Natalie Krivova for their guidance during my visit to MPS, Germany. I am also grateful to the DC members Prof B. Ravindra and Dr Alok Sharan for their valuable inputs and suggestions for my thesis works.

I want to convey my gratitude to Sudip Da, Subhamoy Da and Vaibhav for pa- tiently teaching me the essential things and bearing all my ridiculous questions, without which I could not have done any of my work. It is impossible to put aside the contribution of Ritesh and Satabdwa in this journey. They have always been colleagues, friends and critics, which helped me to shape my works and made this journey memorable. I would also like to thank Manju Da, Rakesh Da, Nancy, and my juniors Aditya, Arpit, Anu, Dibya, Jyoti, Nitin, Tanushree and Upasna for the valuable input in scientific discussions and for the fun we had together.
Thanks a lot to all the administrative staff, library and computer support team, particularly Fayaz, Anish and Ashok, for their help during my stay at IIA. I would like to convey my sincere gratitude to Sankar Sir for his help in completing all the administrative processes. I sincerely applaud the COE, HOD Physics Department and administration staff of Pondicherry University; without their constant support, it was not possible for me to concentrate on my work without worrying about the different non-academic pieces of stuff.


I started at IIA in 2017 and then moved to ARIES in 2020; after that, I worked at ARIES, Nainital, for the last two years. It was not possible without the support of all the members of ARIES, including faculty members, administrative staff and the computer support team. Therefore, I am greatly obliged to all the ARIES members.
No one can work on a scientific problem without a good environment. I am fortunate to have such a wonderful group of people as Partha, Athira, Soumya, Sharmila, Manika and Suman, who created such an atmosphere for me. I will always cherish the memory of the time that I spent with Priyanka Di, Megha Di, Dipanweeta Di, Bhoomika Di, Rubi Di, Snehlata Di, Priya, Prerna, Chayan Da, Anirban Da, Samrat Da, Sandeep, Avinash, Panini, Varun, Raghu, Deepak, Manoj, Aritra, Ankit, Vikrant, Jyoti, Indrani, Anirban, Deepthi, Fazlu, Sonith, Pallavi and Swastik. I would also like to thank Ankur, Vivek, Amar, Rahul, Dimple, Pankaj, Varun, Arpan, Priyanka S, Sadhana, and Priyanka J for making life easier at ARIES during my stay here in the last two years. I would also like to sincerely thank all the canteen staff at Bhaskra (IIA) and Rohini (ARIES) for making my stay comfortable.
This journey could not have been completed without the constant support of my family Maa, Nanimaa and Prabhujee in all my ups and downs.
</div>